# Incident: 2024-11-22 19-54-48

## Summary

Chaos was injected into the JWT Pizza Server via the JWT Pizza Factory which caused massive spikes in pizza creation latency. The latency was quite severe and impacted users for aproximately 4 hours.

Between the hour of 15:45 and 19:35 on November 22, 2024, all users encountered massive pizza latency. The event was triggered by a chaos injection at 10:45. The injection contained vulnerability checking for the system.

A bug in this code caused pizza creation to take anywhere from 30 seconds for just one pizza to much longer or even to failure for larger orders. The event was detected by Grafana. The team started working on the event by implementing a timeout while continuing to attempt to resolve the issue, ultimately detecting the chaos found in the report url returned from the pizza factory. This moderately severe incident affected 100% of users.

There was no further impact noted, no other comments were raised in relation to this incident.

## Detection

The team detected the incident at 15:00 on the morning of November 22. The OnCall developer had been monitoring the logs and began recieving frequent alerts regarding overall request latency and pizza creation latency. Time to detection was very quick, metrics where updated quickly and OnCall developer was monitoring closely. Without that close monitoring, detection would have likely been delayed. 

This incident was detected when the push notification to OnCall developer for pizza and request latency was triggered and OnCall developer was paged.

Next, the TA was paged, because the OnCall developer had implemented a fix that did not work, delaying resolution by 4 hours.

Reduced chaod was be set up by the OnCall developer so that pizza creation and overall request latency will return to normal.

## Impact

For 4hrs and 35mins between 15:00 MST and 19:35 MST on 11/22/2024, our users faced extremely slow pizza creation.

This incident affected all customers (100% of users), who experienced thirty second or longer waits for jwt pizza creation upon ordering.

0 tickets were submitted.

## Timeline

All times are UTC.

- _15:00_ - Chaos was detected in the system
- _15:15_ - OnCall developer began diagnosing the issue
- _17:20_ - A timeout was implace to temporarily mitigate latency
- _19:00_ - Support was contacted to continually diagnose the issue
- _19:05_ - Massive metric spike was detected
- _19:35_ - Injected chaos was discovered and resolved

## Response

After receiving a page at 15:00 UTC, Mackenzie came online at 15:15 UTC in jwt pizza service.

This engineer did not have a background in the chaos injection process so a second alert was sent at 19:00 UTC to TA Stephen who came into the room at 19:01 UTC.

# Root cause

Chaos was intected into the pizza factory. 

## Resolution

By ultimately discovering the source of the chaos the team was able to resolve it. Had the OnCall engineer had a better understanding of chaod, the response and resolution would have likely been half the time. 

# Prevention

No other chaos injections have been detected thus far.

# Action items

1. Continue to educate OnCall engineers regarding chaos testing
1. Increase structure regarding interaction with the pizza factory external api calls
1. Automate factory failure triggers
1. Add loading indicator for users so in the event of a slow factory, users understand what is going on
